[Music]
hello so we're gonna talk about the net
9 jit and some of the new updates that
are in there let me bring in your slides
sure there we go now we we've heard a
lot about performance and some of the
updates and we heard from our friend
Stephen Tobe about some of the updates
that have happened feels like you're
going to go deep on some of those topics
uh we're GNA try you know we can't get
super deep in in half an hour but we'll
we'll do our best to sort of give you a
flavor of what's going on sort of under
the hood so to speak in in the net n all
right well thank you so much Andy the
stage is yours okay um so let me just
sort of jump into things because again
we don't have a super super long time
frame um every release we try to make
some pretty fundamental and important
improvements in the in the ability ofet
to make your programs run more efficient
and you've heard a lot about things
happening at sort of the library level
but in coordination with that kind of
you know down in the depths of the
system we also do a whole bunch of
changes just to try to get the basic
efficiency of programs running better
I'm going to go through a couple
different areas here I'm going to talk
about some work that we did or just give
you some background on exactly what the
jit is in case it's not clear or you
need a refresher um some things that we
did about improving handling of just
basic objects um and some exciting work
that we're having done net n and that
we're plan on building on in future
releases uh some support that we've
added now for arm 64 in particular
scaler Vector extensions scalable Vector
extensions um which are now available in
the new cobalt 100 that Azure is
hosting uh Loops are important part of
every program and we've made some big
improvements in the ability of the jit
to optimize Loops we'll talk about those
briefly some general things that sort of
apply broadly across the board and then
just sort of wrap things up um and give
you ways remind you of ways to get a
hold of us if you see issues where you
think we could be doing a better job or
you want to congratulate us for already
doing a good
job so the that jit we also sometimes
call it the Cen um is a thing that
translates your um programs from
assembly or from Intermediate Language
the thing that gets produced when you
run a net build into the actual machine
code that the the chip knows how to
execute um our code generator includes
the ability to generate code for x64 x86
arm
arm64 and then also the community has
added support for risk V and for Larch
so that means you can take your net
program and run it on many different
pieces of Hardware um and each of those
pieces of Hardware often has many
different variants inside of it of
things that it can do you might be
familiar with a term like ABX 512 which
are the advanced Vector extensions that
Intel processors and AMD processors
offer these days
um arm has similar sort of gradations 8X
and 9x features um and then also many
different operating systems these
operating systems all have different
conventions for the way that the the
machine code needs to operate in order
to be compatible with the system so we
handle Windows cisv those most flavors
of Unix Mac OS and so on and so forth so
there's a lot of different variations
here but there's sort of one engine
behind all of this um and that's the net
J
um we usually compile methods one at a
time and the method is compiled to
machine code just the very first time
that you run it inst the name just in
time compilation turns out that same
piece of technology also handles code
generation if you're building your code
ahead of time like in Native aot or
ready to run so you know terminology
gets a bit fuzzy here but basically we
are generating the code that your
application needs to actually run on the
hardware that you want to run it on and
so in this talk let's do a let's go
through a sample of things that we've
done in9 to make that process work
better um before I get started I just
want to remind people in case you're
curious to look under the hood sometime
and see what's going on we've been
trying to make it easier and easier to
actually look at what the jit does when
it takes your program there's a variety
of ways you can do it there's a very
nice VSS add-in plugin called dis asmo
where you can basically hover your mouse
cursor over a piece of code that you've
written and look at what the jit would
produce for that code um you can also
get that information from command line
processing or there are some web
interfaces where you can basically copy
and paste your code into you know
website and and look at the same thing
these are all pretty cool if you're ever
curious to sort of know more or Tinker
around with your code and see how the
expression of that code in Assembly
Language changes these are awesome
things to know about um all right so
let's talk about objects in particular
about something called Escape
analysis so you probably know in the
world of.net there's roughly two kinds
of data type
there are ref types and there are value
types or sometimes we would call those
objects and structs um and ref types um
or classes instructs and ref types are
things that are allocated always on the
GC Heap uh historically their lifetime
is determined by the GC and that's one
of the big values that the GC brings
like you can create an object you don't
have to do anything explicit to deal
with the fact that the object is
eventually going to become an
interesting and that that storage can be
reclaimed and reused for something else
that GC figures it all out before you
um and then there are structs or value
types these are usually allocated on the
stack but you can box them and put them
on heap if you really want them there or
sometimes inadvertently they'll get
boxed when you weren't expecting it um
if they're allocated on the stack then a
bunch of good things happen the fields
of that value type can be promoted to
the jit and act as if they were
effectively local variables in your
method and those promoted Fields can
live in registers they can be
aggressively analyzed and optimized and
so a lot of good things happen when
promotion kicks in for a struct um and
the lifetime of the struct is determined
by the lifetime of the stack frame where
the struct is allocated so when that
particular stack frame returns that
storage is freed up and it can be reused
so you get somewhat cheaper allocation
one might say it's not not slam dunk but
likely cheaper um if you end up copying
your struck to the heat via boxing then
the lifetime just as with a class is
going to be determined by the GC um and
when you want to operate on the thing
typically you have to unbox it copy it
to a local stack allocated case use that
in your computation so what we've done
in doet 9 is we've enabled a new
technology in the jit called object
stack allocation where if we can prove
that even though you created an object
and you said to put it on the Heap if
the lifetime of that object is bounded
constrained by that stack frame that
allocated it then we'll treat that
object like a value type like a struct
and so we'll allocate the storage for
the object on the stack
and then we will all those good things
that happen when you have a struct kick
in we can promote the fields we can
aggressively optimize the fields this
will work even if you have a box value
type and the key enabler is this proof
that the lifetime is constrained and
that's the thing we call Escape analysis
if you're familiar with Java orgo they
have had this capability for a long time
in the case of java they don't have
struct so having Escape analysis and
stack allocation turned out to be key to
doing a lot of things the upshot is when
this kicks in you have less Heap
allocation
and better code optimization at the same
time so it's really nice
combination there's a simple example
hopefully simple we have a a struct here
or actually we have a class here called
a rectangle it implements a shape
interface and we're just going to create
one of these guys and we're going to
call a method on it um so pretty
straightforward but when we create it
we're going to refer to it through its
interface type rather than through its
Class Type and when we do that then the
runtime has to assume generally that
this interface could be implemented by a
bunch of other classes um and
so when we generate code for it um you
know we have a bunch of possibilities
now in 8.0 we were smart enough to see
that this thing was really a rectangle
under the covers so we basically Dev
viralize that interface call but in
order to do make interface dispatch work
we had to allocate an object and so
we're still allocating an object in 8.0
and then we're initializing its field so
if you sort of look at that little box
of Coden that says 8.0 you'll see
there's a call in there to a method
called or a routine called core info new
help help newest fast that's allocating
Heap object we then fill in the fields
of the Heap object writing twos and
threes and then we read those back to
compute the area so we immediately read
back the values that we just wrote and
then we return now that object that we
just allocated can't be referred to
anymore and so it's going to eventually
be collected by the GC you can see we
went through a lot of work to create an
object that we didn't use for very long
and that just seems kind of unnecessary
and D at n we're able to prove that that
object cannot live longer than the
method that it's allocated in so we no
longer need to allocate the object we
promote its Fields very aggressively and
so we're able to see that instead of
writing two and three to memory we can
just keep them in registers and then we
see the way that those are used and we
understand that the values are just
immediately consumed by this
multiplication we propagate those
constants to the multiply and we figure
out what the answer is so in do at 9 we
just return the number six There's No
Object there's no Fields there's no
computation you know everything is
nicely cleaned
up all right so let's switch gears a
little bit and talk about arm 64 as you
know Microsoft has just introduced uh
its own first uh captive arm 64 host in
in Azure called the Cobalt 100 offers
very awesome computing power you know I
think also very attractive pricing
something everybody ought to really be
thinking about for their Cloud workloads
um one of the nice things that this
machine offers is something called
scalable Vector extensions and I'm going
to just give you just a very brief taste
of what this means um when you have
Vector processing you're able to to do
things you know in basically in chunks
in Vector sized chunks so let's imagine
that we're trying to add up you know an
array here and say our array has got 10
elements in it if I have um a vector of
size four I can do two ads of eight and
then I can do one add of two and then I
can accumulate but that one add of two
is not Vector sized and so you'll see in
the circle there instead of me being
able to do just Vector operations I have
to drop back for this little tail of
processing this last few elements to
scalar processing and sort of add them
up one by one um and so you find very
commonly in these machines with
vectorized code that you end up writing
a lot of this little residual Loop codes
people call it tail Loops for example um
in sve there's a very nice feature it's
also available in ABX 512 on Intel where
you can actually add predicated
operations into your vector operations
and so one of the benefits is you can
eliminate the need for these tail Loops
entirely so what happens is in this case
we do two Vector operations both of
length four we also produce a mask at
each step saying which elements of the
vector are active and we get to that
last step The Mask basically turns off
two of the elements the vector and so
instead of doing a size four add we end
up doing a size two add so in three
steps we've managed to add up all the
numbers we have to do one more reduction
at the end to add the four Vector Lanes
together and voila we have our answer
without any extra fussing around with a
tail Loop or anything like that so you
can really get some nice benefit out of
these predicated or mased operations in
your vector processing obviously you got
to do some manual coding here to take
advantage of it um but it's something
that if you're interested in really high
performance Vector code it's worth
checking
out um and so in net 9 we've added
support for 281 new apis for sve
including
all those categories you see there a
whole bunch of actual instructions that
we canm this is all hooked up to Vector
of
T so it's going to act like we have
scalable vectors it turns out in this
implementation we're going to hardcode
the vector length to 16 bytes but in the
future when we get onto Hardware that
has longer Vector support in Hardware
we're going to have that value be able
to adjust upwards one is a cool thing to
check out um we'd love to get feedback
on this and see how well you know our
implementation works in practice on code
that you might want to vectorize
uh let's switch topics again and talk a
little bit about loops um these are
things that if you're familiar with
compiler technology probably thought
that we were already doing inside of our
code generator turns out that we weren't
um basically one of the key things about
loops is to understand so-called
induction variables and induction
variables are values within the loop
that change predictably from one
iteration to the next let's look at this
simple Loop here on the left we have a
value here I and I is simp incrementing
by one every single Loop iteration right
so we're able to do the analysis now to
understand quite a bit about how the
value of I evolves as the loop
processes and in this particular case
we're going to take advantage of that
we're going to realize that inside the
loop you're not actually making any
reference to I at all the value of I
isn't used anywhere it's only used to
control the loop um and because of that
it's actually more efficient for us to
reexpress the loop as counting downwards
instead of counting upwards so instead
of effectively writing for I equals 1 to
I equals 1 I less than n we change it to
be if I you know is equal
to and and we go downwards until we get
to zero or n minus one so anyway so we
end up effectively doing this
transformation that you see over here on
the side um now you might wonder like
well what's the point of that why do you
even bother if you look at the code
that's in purple obviously this is
machine code and not all of you may be
comfortable with it but you can notice
one thing is that on the left we had
four inst instructions and on the right
we have three so hey we got rid of one
instruction in the loop it should run a
little faster the other thing that's
actually a bigger deal is that the
verion on the left is using two
registers it's using a register to
remember what the value of I is and it
has another register to remember what
the value of n is where the code on the
right only needs to keep track of one
thing and so we've freed up a register
that could be super useful somewhere
else in the loop say we had an actual
interesting computation going on here so
we get a smaller Loop it uses fewer
registers it's just better
overall um similar kind of thing we can
do now that we can analyze induction
variables is strength reduction so now
you have some sort of operation in your
Loop typically that involves a multiply
so there on the left you can see we have
I controlling the loop now we do have a
reference to I inside the loop but when
we use it we're all always multiplying
it by three now multiplication on most
computers is not as cheap as addition um
and so if we could somehow reexpress
that mult multiplication as an addition
we might be able to make Loop run faster
save some time and this is what we can
do when we have strength reduction so in
this case we understand that while I is
incrementing by one every iteration I *
3 is incrementing by three every
iteration right and then we also
understand again how the value of I is
evolving we turn this into a down
counted Loop okay and we replace the
multiplication in there by an addition
so if you look at that transformation
and you might have to squint a little to
to convince yourself that we're actually
doing things correctly but now we have a
down count to Loop so we're using
potentially a few
register plus registers for that and
also we've gotten gotten rid of the
multiply changed it into an addition so
again the loop is now operating more
efficiently and as a final piece this
one might be a little bit hard for
people to understand but let's give it a
try um there's a mode in arm 64 called
post increment addressing mode so if you
are walking through data structure like
an array effectively somewhere in there
there has to be a pointer that's
advancing along pointing at each element
of the array um and in net 8 we would
actually compute that pointer value on
the Fly by taking I and multiplying it
by the size of the array element and
adding it to that base element of the
array to figure out where to point and
that's what that very first instruction
in purple there on the in the middle
column is showing was basically adding
result of that um thing and then that
addition happens sort of just for the
array access and then we have to
increment I and we have to do the
computation of loop which is adding up
the sum so you'll see that there's
effectively three additions going on in
that Loop one of which is just sort of
used transiently compute the element
address so if you could capture that and
you could do the addition and take
advantage of the fact that it's
incrementing you know effectively the
loop control thing you can eliminate an
addition and there we have it on net 9
there's one less addition
happening um and the addition that was
explicit in the addressing mode before
is now in blue has a special syntax
which basically means we're going to use
x0 as the as the address of the element
and then we're going to increment x0 by
four so there's an ad hidden in there so
again fewer registers um a fewer
instructions faster processing you know
all good stuffff
all right let's talk a little bit about
some general optimizations so as you
know in net 8 we introduced Dynamic pjo
and net 9 we've made some enhancements
to Dynamic pggo I'd like to just touch
on one of those here and then we've also
made some improvements to
inlining um
so in net 8 most of the activity around
pggo had to do with virtual calls and
interface calls so we would profile look
at what types were involved in those and
try to make those operations be more
efficient by by by guessing or
predicting what the outcomes might be
and so in dnet um nine we've extended
that to include some other operations
that deal with types like casting so in
this case we
have um a simple question like we're
just going to look at an object and say
hey um is this object Implement I
collection right so might think well
okay that seems like a fairly simple
thing to do but when you actually look
at the codee that net 8 generated for
that the code for this is collection it
has to delegate the heavy lifting off to
this helper method and the helper method
I don't have the code here for it but
turns out it actually does a fair amount
of analysis because
they're implementation of interfaces can
go through some twisty paths and so
there's a lot of checking that goes on
here um and so you know potentially it
takes a while um now what we did in net
9 is when we run this version at tier
zero we sort of Watch What types you
present to this interface call or this
this helper call we're like are you
asking about the same type a lot and if
so maybe we can sort of guess that that
might be the type that you ask about
here and bypass all of this and figure
out what the answer is up front and
indeed that's what we've actually done
in net 9 so here's the same code you'll
notice that if you look at the Coden on
the right at the very bottom you still
see sometimes we have to fall back to
that General Helper and be like hey we
couldn't figure it out we got to go do
the general thing but before we get to
that point we do a couple of quick
checks like okay is the object that you
pass us not null and if so is it this
specific class that we saw you asking
about a lot before if the answer to that
is yes then we actually know the answer
and we sort of just quickly comput it
and we're done so this is another kind
of profile guided optimization where by
observing how your code behaves we can
try to anticipate when we go to generate
optimized code that it's still going to
behave that way and provide these fast
path and speed things up now you might
think this can't be that big of a deal
like how much difference is this going
to make so here's some little benchmarks
that we ran um you know these sometimes
are kind of misleading because we're
really focusing here on some of the
overhead involved in doing these casts
instead of you know there's not a lot of
computation once you get the answer but
still these are things that you might
end up doing in your code or that your
program might doing so if you look at
the at the
benchmark.us over there on the right you
can see that you know these things
something like a factor of two factor of
you know six Factor something faster
because of these changes so it actually
speeds things up quite a bit in
general all right and then one last
thing um so one of the big powerful
features in net is are generic types and
generic methods um and there's a fair
amount of Machinery under the cover to
implement these things and Implement
them
efficiently and we're always looking for
ways to get in there and actually make
that stuff work even better um one of
the things you may have seen in the past
or maybe you haven't seen it but uh is
that when you have say two different
generic methods like here we have two
different generic methods called test
and coli um that when one of them calls
another sometimes there was actually a
bunch of extra computation that had to
go on um because we couldn't effectively
combine them together via inlining so if
you look at net 8 here here have test
calling call E it looks like sort of the
same thing is going on like there's a t
in all of these it turns out at when we
generate code for um test you know and
it's calling Ki we don't necessarily
know right ahead of time that Kali is
going to get the same type that test has
it may seem weird but that's actually
the way it is so when we go to call ki
we got to go do a bunch of work and
figure out like hey like what type is K
actually going to be instantiated on
here and that code in the box where it
says runtime lookup is actually going
off and doing this thing and not only do
you see like a bunch of checking you see
yet again another helper in there like
wait a minute like we got to go and ask
you know go to some other piece of code
and figure this thing out so potentially
kind of inefficient um and then when we
actually go to invoke the call E we
can't inline the code we have to call it
so down there at the bottom in that thin
skinny box we're actually calling this
method um so and if we invoke it on
something like string
um that'll turn out that string is a
reference type so type of t. is value
type is going to be false so we're doing
all of this work basically to discover
something that maybe should have been
obvious to us that the answer was indeed
like
false anyway so when we get to
um
net9 then the end and the we we excuse
me we managed to remove all those
bottlenecks about inlining from one
shared generic method into another um
and once we do that we know in this case
that we have whenever we have a Shar
generic the type that it's being shared
over is always a reference type so it's
never a value type and so all this
method does in dot at n is simply
immediately return false so again you
can see you know big difference in
performance between doing this kind of
stuff to discover that the answer is
false and basically doing this kind of
thing to know that the answer is false
and uh I had a chart on here I think I I
must have lost that version but anyways
this this this box here down at the
bottom is showing what our Benchmark
system told us this this change made in
our in our code you can see many many
benchmarks improved you're probably
going to see some you know Improvement
in your own code if you do this kind of
thing fairly frequently so the upshot is
with this optimization generics
basically compose more uh compose better
with each other they play along nicely
um you can use them without worrying
about the fact that when you you cross
from one generic method to another or
from one generic class to methods of
another generic class that potentially
you're losing a little bit of
performance because of these things um
all right so let's wrap things up um so
I've shown you in the past 20 minutes or
so a small sample of the changes that we
made in net 9 it turned out we made
about 1100 changes to the jit over the
year um between donet 8 and donet N um
clearly there's no way I could even
bother to you know give you a view of
more than a very small fraction of them
I try to just highlight a few things
that we thought were interesting
um and the good news is the only thing
you really need to do to see the benefit
of all this work is updated. net9 you
don't have to change anything about the
way you code or deploy or anything like
that um you might be curious to try your
code on a different platform like hey
maybe I should run on arm64 instead of
on Intel or whatever but you know you
you just pick up the new release and
immediately you get these benefits
without changing your code at all um and
you know we would love to hear your
feedback if you see things when you do
this where performance isn't what you
expect or if performance is is good we
always love to hear feedback um we
especially interested if you are going
to try out arm 64 and the Cobalt 100 um
and try these new experimental sve
extensions that we talked about so if
you try to vectorize your code in arm 64
you're taking advantage of the
predication and all of that you know
please please let us know how it
goes and here are our various links for
some things that you can try so you know
one good way to get a hold of us is
actually to open up issues on theet
runtime GitHub repo we're super
responsive we we generally are you know
quite active looking for feedback and
problems that people report or anything
like that or suggestions on how we can
do things better I mentioned sharp lab
that's the online web viewer um you can
try and look at your code we did a blog
post talking about the engineering of
the sve extensions that might be
interest to you um the asmo the plugin
that I showed the VSS plugin to shoot to
look at the code um and then a couple
issues you might want to look at in our
GitHub one is a a discussion of some
enhancements to the object stack
allocation phase that I've talked about
earlier and another is our proposed work
for Net 10 anyways so feel free to check
those things out again get a hold of if
you have any questions and with that I
want to thank you very much for
listening in